---
title: College campus ministries, offices in the Church, and more
date: 2020-10-04T12:15:25-04:00
tags: []
weight: 
contentlevel: intermediate
writinglevel: neither
---

**August, 2014 - right before I started college**

## Steven

Hi Bob,

I hope the Lord is blessing you for your continued ministry. I'm not sure if I ever told you that your writings were a determining factor in me really "being" a Christian, but I just wanted you to know that your effort is greatly appreciated by at least one person (probably more than that person knows)!

1) I'm fairly confident that I have mentioned that I'm going off to college next semester (or implied it maybe?), but there are a couple things about the whole thing that I wanted to ask about. Now I know that things in the realm of practical applicability aren't really under the umbrella of your ministry, but I was hoping you might be able to help anyway. I spent the necessary time to make sure that my roommate (at a secular University) is at least Christian by all appearances. Both of us were somewhat interested in many of the different Christian ministries around campus, but I must confess that I am honestly somewhat trepidatious about the whole affair. I never was particularly enamored with youth groups even before I found your site and could put my relative distaste into words. To be rather blunt, after seeing what I can do with a study Bible, your site, and several other resources, even before seeing what any of the campus ministries are like, I already have a sneaking suspicion that I could be much more productive studying on my own rather than under the guidance of the campus leaders (the same conclusion that I have come to in the Church my family goes to; I normally just tune out the sermons and read the Bible instead). Couple my (perhaps unjustified) appraisal of the programs with my past experience that groups of these sort inevitably end up being emotional support groups and social networks instead of Bible studies, and you end up with me wishing to find some excuse for why I can't join any of the 20 or so different groups (why are there so many?). I think my family knows me well enough that they would accept me "just doing things on my own," but I do somewhat worry about treading on toes when at college. If any of the many worried evangelists walk up to me to ask why I don't "do" their thing, what do I tell them... I think I'm more productive than your "small group study" of 15 people combined? I've always sort of had a problem with too much candor in the past; I call things for how I see them, consequences be blasted. And I can't see that going over particularly well with most of the "social Christianity" I'm expecting from such people. On the plus side, my roommate, prima facie, seems to be a serious enough Christian, and having one truly dedicated friend is almost more than I could ask for anyway. I don't know if you've had a lot of experience with campus ministries (expecting you to suggest one if you make a habit of not suggesting Churches would be fruitless I'm sure), but do you think the rationale that I could do better on my own is a valid reason for not partaking? Should I try most of them out for a spin first (I'm a bit worried that their "recruiting phase appearance" is vastly different from normal operations)?

2) My second question in this regard is related to what it is that I'm supposed to do. Since the last time I brought it up, I think I've come to accept that I will find out one way or the other even if I don't get any real guidance (from my point of view). I'm going to try my hardest next year, and if I realize that I am not meant to do something that involves Engineering I guess I get to switch schools. I wasn't really expecting a direct "this is your mission in life" communique with God, but I still seem to be at the "every single major looks interesting" stage. Is "just waiting for it" something that we as Christians can do without shame? Patience in something like waiting for the right person to marry makes intuitive sense to me, but I'm having a harder time swallowing this unknown purpose feeling. The relative tensions in the world (Gaza, Mosul, Ebola, etc.) [**Post hoc note:** Ha! 2020's coronavirus pandemic, global economic turmoil, and political upheaval make 2014 look like a calm, placid lake] are also serving to remind me that the time is not far, meaning that I would much rather choose the right thing rather than be in a poor position when things do get put into motion. Barring my own personal problems, I also have a couple questions that are probably more "up your creek" so to speak.

3) When doing research for my blog (on which I am terribly behind compared to what I wanted to do over the summer) [**Post hoc note:** this blog mentioned had a short lifespan. I had grand plans but was not really prepared at the time], I covered a large amount of information on the office in local churches that is the "elder," which, as I'm sure you know, encompasses the "bishop/overseer," pastor/teacher, and stewardship roles as well (the Greek words respectively being Presbuteros [for elder], *Episcopos*, *Poimen*/*Didaskalos*, and *Oikonomos*). On this single "elder role," my theory is that though they may all be the same office, some elders may serve to discipline, some to teach, some to make the Church's fiscal policy, etc. (they don't all have to do all aspects of the office, even if they all hold the same authority over the church). The thing that I am a little bit confused about is why Paul never explicitly tells us how old one must be in order to be considered for this "one" role. Obviously the requirements that an elder have a wife and believing children implies a certain age (do babies count? Toddlers?), as does the "not newly converted" bit. This whole thing came to me when I was pondering Seminary and pastors in general. I'm so undecided as yet that I can't say I myself want to go to Seminary (I think I would enjoy it), but it begs the question of how biblical it is sending these young twenties-ish men out to local churches to minister to them. Most M.Div programs are 3 years, and any who opt for a Th.M get to tack on another year. Assuming a normal bachelor's degree from some accredited college beforehand, we are looking at men getting out of their training as early as 25 [**Post hoc note:**: while I ultimately ended up taking Greek at a state school not Seminary, here I am posting this at age 24], which hardly seems to fit the "elder" role (this is assuming that they are already married and have kids at some point of accountability). Obviously our culture's "norms of age" differ from the ones in Paul's time, but I know of few people nowadays who even get married much earlier than 25. There is something to be said for maturity beyond years (I'd like to think I'm ahead of most 18 year olds) [**Post hoc note:** I had very recently turned 18 at the time of this email exchange], but I am having a hard time reconciling any modern conceptualization of pastors with Paul's words on elders in Titus and 1 Timothy (if my reading of them as the same office is correct).

4) Tangentially, I am also somewhat curious about single men that go into ministry. The entirety of my next post is dedicated to the church and its organization (both universally and locally), so I want to make sure I understand it fairly thoroughly. For those who choose to remain single, it seems the office in the local church of "elder" is unavailable to them, as are any less authoritative helping positions (deacons having similar requirements). Paul, as one good biblical example, seems to fill what people of today would call a "evangelist/minister/preacher" position, where he is dedicated to sharing the gospel and ministering to different churches (I'm fairly sure the Greek words for such a position are, respectively, *Euaggelistes*, *Diakonos* (*in certain contexts*), and *Kerux*). *Diakonos* is also used to denote the entirely different office of deacon (cf. Philippians 1:1, 1 Timothy 3:8). This sort of office [that Paul occupies] seems to be attested to in Ephesians 4:11 as something totally different than the elders, so, if I am not failing in my interpretation, it appears that this is where the single men fit into ministry. Now, my question lies in exactly how these "mini-Pauls" fit into our society today. Obviously none of the mainliners follow the biblical polity structure, but for those local churches that exist around the country (that do a somewhat better job at it), how would these evangelists fit into the structure? Should they be as learned or more learned than the teaching elders at congregations? Should they go on "tours" through different churches, or only have a designated handful that they minister to? Is this the office that modern missionaries possess?

5) This last one is something that I struggle with a fair amount. I love reading and learning (assuming I am not running away from God like I tend to do more than I'd ever want), but I confess that I am very bad at praying by my own estimation. As a kid my parents always prayed with me before bed, but obviously that doesn't continue. I either feel like my prayers are too structured (Dear God, forgive me for \*long list of things I've done wrong\*, thank you for dying on the cross for my sins, be with my family and relatives, help the oppressed/poor, in Jesus' name, Amen), or I get too lazy and say "Lord, you know my sins, forgive me." I feel the true path is somewhere in between trying to wrack my brain for every single thing I can think of that I did wrong and just saying forgive everything without trying to recount what needs to change. I also seem to have a very hard time focusing when I pray, as in my thoughts always go down rabbit trails instead of staying focused on God. I know I also tend to scold myself and repeat similar things to what I already prayed for when my mind wanders, but my focus will inevitably wander again just seconds later. I've tried praying for focus, but I'm sure this a problem on my end and not God failing to provide for me. Is there a post you could refer me to on "how to pray: for the spiritually immature" or something of the like? Also, should we include the Lord's prayer (Matthew 6:9-13), or is this something that churches have elevated to an unscriptural place of importance?

In Christ our Savior,

Steven

## Dr. Luginbill of Ichthys.com

Hello Steven,

Good to hear from you, and I truly do appreciate your testimony and your good words -- and your continued growth, progress and production for our Lord even more.  As to your questions:

**Para-Christian Groups**:  Nowadays, Christian churches are problematic, teaching very little and being wrong about much of what they do teach.  Superficiality is the order of the day, and in my observation this is even more the case in para groups.  They generally try to make up for the lack of true substance by injecting even more emotion (if that can be believed, given the emotionally charged nature of many churches these days).  It seems that when you have nothing in your heart of any weight, as soon as the "dope" of emotion runs down, you "feel dry" and disoriented.  One of the ways these groups like to make up for the hollowness of their own spiritual lives is by interfering with the lives of others.  That includes evangelizing in a way that is annoying and therefore often very ineffective; it also includes trying to regulate the behavior (according to false and legalistic standards) of those who are attracted into their orbit.  The above may not be a fair assessment of every para group on every college campus (and these differ chapter to chapter), but I do feel that it is safe to say that a good deal of prudence ought to be deployed before getting deeply involved in one.  To use a crude analogy, I am all for marriage (for those called to it), but I would not advocate looking for a prospective bride in a strip-club.  Similarly, a good Christian friend might be found in one of these para groups, but that would be an accidental thing in most cases -- if by "good Christian friend" we mean someone who understands what spiritual growth, progress and production is really all about and is determined to pursue Christ's will for his/her life in the correct way.

**Career**:  You are correct that I am reluctant to weigh in on the specifics here.  I will say that you are giving it good and serious thought in what seems to me to be plenty of time.  There are those who at age seven wanted to be a lawyer, e.g., and pursued that goal relentlessly and are now actually happy being lawyers.  A more common experience is to go college with one idea and leave with another.  That is because college is broadening (or ought to be).  My advice to undergraduates is to branch out and sample things that seem interesting to them.  I do understand that nowadays there is a premium on getting done in four years, and that for some majors that almost requires showing up with credits already in the bank.  But summer school can close that gap.  Figuring out what one really feels called to do with one's talents in this life is as about as important a life-task as there is, and it should not be short-changed (at least not to the point of getting it wrong).

**Church Polity**:  I will give you some links on this: "[Church Polity:  Elders and three other passages](http://ichthys.com/mail-Church%20Polity.htm)" and "[Some Questions on Church Polity](http://ichthys.com/mail-Church%20Polity%202.htm)".  Clearly, you've done some good and detailed work.  My bottom-line on this issue is that the New Testament deliberately does not go into much detail about the specifics.  That is because the goal of the local church ought to be absolute (spiritual growth), but the polity needed to achieve that goal needs to be somewhat flexible (in order to take into account all sorts of non-essential factors which change with time, language, culture, technology, etc.).  The somewhat tragic irony on this point is that the church-visible has pretty much gotten it completely backwards.  Groups divide, fight, and stand to the death on issues of polity -- and never study and teach the Word of God.  As to age of service, elders are "old" etymologically, and Jesus was thirty when He began His public ministry (even though if anyone was capable of starting earlier it was He), as did John the baptist.  The Levites began at thirty, but occasionally twenty-five is mentioned.  Much more important than chronological age, however, is spiritual age.  A young man of, say, twenty three who is actually gifted and properly prepared to teach the Bible in a substantive way should be preferred to a sexagenarian who is doctrinally confused and who doesn't bother to study and teach.

**Single Pastors**: See previous links.  In my view, Paul, being an apostle, was unique in that office, and of course that gift is no longer being given.  As mentioned, polity will vary, but wherever there is anything resembling a church, there will be a group of people (biblically, men) who are in charge of the church; and inevitably, one of those men will act as the leader.  If the church is worth anything at all, there will be some teaching going on, and one of those men will be doing most if not all of the teaching; as a result, that man will have the most influence in the church, regardless of whether or not he officially occupies the top position.  Everything else is window dressing, and trying to write up lots of rules and back them up biblically only obscures these essential truisms of any church -- it also distracts from the fundamental purpose of meeting together as Christians: the authoritative, doctrinal, orthodox, substantive teaching of the Word of God in order to edify those who attend.  Whether the teacher is single or married is of no moment.  Both situations have their own complications.  The passages in the pastoral epistles which say "husband of one wife" mean "not a polygamist" (a greater problem in that day than in our country today, but not a non-issue at any time).

**Prayer**:  I think when you suggest that an in-between approach would be right for you that this is a mark of spiritual maturity.  Making prayer perfunctorily short on the one hand or concocting a very long and arduous prayer discipline which becomes ritualized on the other are both questionable approaches.  Keep praying.  You will find the approach which is right for you.  Good self-discipline is important in this as in many things, but some Christians are just more interested in prayer than others -- we all have our gifts (and we all have our strengths and weaknesses).  As with all things, finding a time and place to pray where one can be consistent in the effort day by day is very helpful.  Also, thanksgiving is always an important part of prayer, as is putting in petitions for other people.  The Lord's prayer is a wonderful prayer to pray every day, and much more so when a person truly understands the import of its phrases (it synopsizes the whole plan of God and the Christian way of life; see the link: ["The Lord's Prayer"](http://ichthys.com/mail-Lords%20Prayer.htm)).  Confession is something which can be both general and specific; the former because we often sin in ignorance, the latter because, after all, "all sin" (Rom.3:23).  More prayer is, generally speaking, better than less (as long as it is truly done in the Spirit in the right way and for all the right reasons), but mixing all these elements together in the proper proportion, manner and method is an individual thing -- that is why when He was asked our Lord gave the disciples the perfect "format prayer" without telling them that this was the only one or only way to pray (after all, there are two slightly different versions for a reason).

I continue to gain encouragement from your obvious spiritual progress, my friend.  Keep running the good race -- in the successful endurance of this great contest there is the greatest reward.

Your friend in Jesus Christ,

Bob L.

## Steven

I shall try not to put words into your mouth, but let me see if I can fairly summarize what you responded just for clarification (to make sure I am getting the gist of things).

**Para-Christian Groups**: If there happens by some miracle to be a productive group, fantastic; just do not expect it, and do not waste time trying to "put clothes on the emperor." If I'm reading the unstated answer to my question of the first post, this would mean that studying on my own would probably actually be preferable to joining a campus ministry, especially if I found a couple of close [truly Christian] friends.

**Career**: Rushing it is not as necessary as actually figuring out your calling, so "waiting for it" [conviction] should be a priority before going full throttle in some career.

Just as a little more background, I could probably make it out in 4 years even if I'm a bit indecisive because I have ~30 hours going in because of AP credit. I am planning on taking a survey course at Georgia Tech for all the different branches of engineering, and if I come out of next year deciding that absolutely nothing clicked, I could a) try another very technology oriented major at this first school, b) transfer to the other state school which has an A.B./M.A. program in Greek/Classics (if I decide that Seminary is my calling), and better options outside of engineering/physics/business, or c) pick the most interesting of the engineering branches and hope I get more interested in some of the later classes. I'm afraid that I might not hit any of the interesting stuff while doing the core credits (that are pushed upon me my first 2-3 semesters), which is rather unfortunate, especially since transferring credit from one school to another can be arduous or impossible (i.e. once I do make it to what "would be" the interesting classes, switching schools might significantly hamper my graduation). Does this plan sound like a wise one to you?

**Church Polity**: Structure doesn't matter in the Church nearly as much as substantive Bible teaching (this part I have already covered in my draft). Elders do not need to be "elderly" before they start their teaching (though 30 seems like a fair general guideline); rather, they should be clearly gifted in teaching and mature in their walk (and these two qualification trump any arbitrary age restriction/guideline).

**Single Pastors**: It does not matter if an elder/overseer/pastor is married [to a woman] or not (i.e. is single), since the Bible was prohibiting polygamists from teaching, not single men. Thus, single men can be pastors as long as they have the gift of teaching and are mature in their walk (I'm beginning to see a pattern).

As a matter of clarification, however, I would like to ask your opinion on Ephesians 4:11. Who do you think that these "evangelists" (*euaggelistes*) are? The first two "types" of people are things of the past: the thirteen "true" apostles (counting Paul and Matthias), and the true prophets. This leaves us with the "evangelists" and the "pastor-teachers," which seem to be distinct, at least in all the English versions. I am not trying to muddle any Church polity as you have described it (I have read most all you have written on the subject), I was just wondering what you thought of a third possible office besides elders/overseers/pastors and deacons.

**Prayer**: The Lord's prayer is a good basic format for prayer, especially if one understands the full meaning (but it is not set as "the only way"). In general, more prayer is good if undertaken for the right reasons, but some are very much more gifted than others in this area. There is no "magic recipe." Consistency and finding a time of the day that works for the individual, just like Bible study, are important parts of being successful in prayer.

In addition to my "understanding check" (and the embedded questions within it), I have a couple other things that I forgot to ask about the first time through:

1) My family has traditionally said a prayer at meals all together, more like a creed almost than anything else. It goes "Come Lord Jesus be our Guest, and let these gifts to us be blessed, Amen" ... and that's it. I have sometimes taken to saying my own more personal prayer, but was wondering what you thought about the whole thing. Most other families I know (grandparents, cousins, friends) have one person actually pray out loud and ask for God's blessing on the food and sometimes for safe travel, peace, etc. This always seemed to be the more "right" way to do it, but I've never brought it up with my family. Is this a big deal?

2) I was recently talking to some people about allegory/symbolism vs. literalism in the Bible, specifically how one knows when it is the one or the other. We had our go with numerology, and I got around to convincing them that "important" numbers (7 = created completeness/perfection, 3 = natural perfection, 4/12 = symmetry/organization of creation, 40 = sufficiency of time, etc.) are really only important **some** of the time (i.e. every time you see a 7 you don't immediately jump to conclusions). Then we shifted over into more theological topics, like which books are allegorical, how literally we should take Revelation, and the like. I was of the opinion that "the Bible says what it says," while they tended toward a little bit more liberal interpretation. I pointed out how it is a very blurred line: when do Adam and Eve become allegorical? When does Jesus' crucifixion and Resurrection become allegorical? I left the discussion feeling a little bit confused because I've always kind of thought the Bible is literally literal, minus very obvious imagery parts. For example, I see the description Jesus in Revelation as being literal (as do you), the Beast as being literal, etc. How do you know when something is literal and when something is meant to be taken allegorically? Must one have extensive background before the distinction is clear?

3) Related to the above, I know you often remind people arguing for water baptism that Acts is a historical account, and does not give commentary on the correctness of the things being done. How do you know what books (or what parts of books) are to be taken in a historical light, and what parts are to be taken as didactic? Both can be valid at the same time too, right? 

in Christ,

Steven

## Dr. Luginbill of Ichthys.com

Hello Steven,

You read me loud and clear!  I have no quibbles with your understanding of the previous responses whatsoever.

1) Your family's approach is typical and I would not want to find fault with it.  When you have your own family, you can do it your way, naturally.  In the meantime, I see no problem with going along (or with being inventive yourself if this does not offend).  A believer should be aware that earthly food and drink is a provision from the Lord and it really only symbolizes the truly important provision:  the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, His throwing in of His lot with us by taking on true humanity, and His work in dying for all of sins -- that is the foundation of all things, and good to remember when we eat and drink (Deut.8:3).

2) This is an involved question but in general terms your simple answer is precisely correct:  the Bible "says what it means and means what it says"; only when it is clearly being symbolic should it be taken as primarily symbolic, even in the book of Revelation (e.g., "A great sign appeared in heaven . . ."; Rev.12:1).  I talk about [the hermeneutics of interpreting prophecy](http://ichthys.com/Tribulation-Part1.htm#Hermeneutic%20Issues) at the link (see also: ["Biblical Metaphors and Symbolism"](http://ichthys.com/mail-metaphor.htm)).

3) This is another great question.  When our Lord is speaking, everything He says is true.  And we know that everything He did was right.  When David is speaking as a prophet (in any of the Psalms), we know that all He says is proscriptive; his actions as recorded in the books of Samuel, however, are not necessarily right.  They may be right, they may be wrong, or they may be of no probative or exemplary value at all.   Interpretation is required to make the right decision on these things.  The same goes, as you rightly state, with the book of Acts.  The apostles were specially gifted men (as David was), but that doesn't mean that all they did was right (any more than all that David, who also had the Spirit, never erred).  Their actions may have been wrong (there are some examples of this) or may have no probative or exemplary value.  There are many more examples of the latter.  One of the critical things to take into account in Acts are the circumstances.  Peter addressing a crowd of Jews who are not believers, who knew about and even saw Christ but still did not respond in faith, on the day of witnessing a marvelous miracle, when the temple was still standing and before anyone, even the apostles, really understood that the new era of the Church would see the gospel given far and wide to the gentiles, and ritualistic Judaism come to an end (when the temple was destroyed), constitutes a different set of circumstances than, say, a pastor today standing in the pulpit of a local church.  These differences may or may not be significant (I believe all of them definitely are), so proper interpretation has to look and see what the Bible has to say about all aspects of the doctrinal question at issue in such cases; that is to say, since this is a historical action being described, it is inappropriate to apply it as pre or proscriptive for all time automatically (in the case of the water-baptism, it most certainly is not in my view, as you know).

Keep running the good race, my friend.  You are already far ahead on the course and making good time -- keep it up!

Your fellow runner with Jesus Christ,

Bob L.

## Steven

I'll try to make this brief since you've already covered all the important questions I had:

Last reply I embedded a couple of questions in my "understanding summary" portion (which was poor structure on my part I'm afraid), and you seem to have missed them. I'll recopy them here (neither are of large importance, I just wanted to see your opinion more than anything else).

1) Just as a little more background, I could probably make it out in 4 years even if I'm a bit indecisive because I have ~30 hours going in because of AP credit. I am planning on taking a survey course at Georgia Tech for all the different branches of engineering, and if I come out of next year deciding that absolutely nothing clicked, I could a) try another very technology oriented major at this first school, b) transfer to the other state school which has an A.B./M.A. program in Greek/Classics (if I decide that Seminary is my calling), and better options outside of engineering/physics/business, or c) pick the most interesting of the engineering branches and hope I get more interested in some of the later classes. I'm afraid that I might not hit any of the interesting stuff while doing the core credits (that are pushed upon me my first 2-3 semesters), which is rather unfortunate, especially since transferring credit from one school to another can be arduous or impossible (i.e. once I do make it to what "would be" the interesting classes, switching schools might significantly hamper my graduation). Does this plan sound like a wise one to you?

and

2) As a matter of clarification, I would like to ask your opinion on Ephesians 4:11. Who do you think that these "evangelists" (*euaggelistes*) are? The first two "types" of people are things of the past: the thirteen "true" apostles (counting Paul and Matthias), and the true prophets. This leaves us with the "evangelists" and the "pastor-teachers," which seem to be distinct, at least in all the English versions. I am not trying to muddle any Church polity as you have described it (I have read most all you have written on the subject), I was just wondering what you though of a third possible office besides elders/overseers/pastors and deacons.

Thanks for your answers!

in Christ,

Steven

## Dr. Luginbill of Ichthys.com

Hi Steve,

I think your college plan is eminently reasonable.  I didn't weigh in on the specifics because, as Clauswitz observed, "no plan survives contact with the enemy".  That is my life experience as well.  Hence the need for flexibility, and your plan is wonderfully flexible -- so much so that I am confident that you will modify it even further if need be when new information rolls in (as it will).

I agree that evangelists and pastor-teachers are the two gifts for teaching still in operation.  A person can have both gifts, by the way.  However, the former is concerned with "giving the good news", that is, evangelizing, as we might say.  Although, that word has taken on a good deal of baggage in modern evangelicaldom, so I would want to spell it out more lest anyone become confused.  A missionary, for example, would need that gift, in my view.  Some people are much better than others at making new contacts and sharing Jesus Christ with them.  When prepared and mature, such a person could have a life-ministry built around that concept.  This is the one outreach a local church most certainly should support, whether domestically or overseas.

Keep up the good work for Jesus Christ, my friend!

Bob L.
